"A Higher Consciousness" by Ishwar Puri

http://www.ISHANEWS.org http://www.HAZURSAWANISHARPURI.com

We are going to talk about higher consciousness today. When perfect
living masters mention higher consciousness, they do not refer to an
altered state of consciousness. They do not refer to a new awareness,
something that we are not experiencing everyday. They really mean
something higher, more desireable, more durable, more permanent, more
akin to our real nature, more real in fact. Therefore it is best to
understand how we use the word consciousness and awareness so that we
can understand what is meant by higher consciousness.

When we talk of consciousness, generally it means we are conscious of
something and that is why we call it consciousness. When we say we are
conscious of something, it is generally understood in the sense of
being aware, just knowing through senses or otherwise. Even memory
would be a sort of awareness. So when we are aware of something, we
say we are conscious of something. In that sense, something that we
have forgotten would not be called consciousness. Something that is
not immediately available for awareness but can be recalled would not
be called consciousness. This is not the term in which the great
mystics and masters have used the word consciousness. They have not
said consciousness is only what is available now. Consciousness for
them means all possible potential awareness. [1:40]

Therefore, they distinguish between what is consciousness and what is
awareness. Awareness is what is immediately available and
consciousness is what is potentially available in the past, present or
future or in any other dimension.

Let us then consider what is meant by higher consciousness. Does it
mean change of awareness? Does it mean recall of something that is not
available now? Or does it only mean a strictly higher consciousness in
a level of experience that is different from all levels of experience
at one plane such as the physical plane in which we are normally
experiencing consciousness through the physical body? [2:33]

To make it more simple, I would put this question, when we talk of
higher consciousness are we including in higher consciousness
dreamlike states, trancelike states in which the awareness is altered
but is no different than the awareness of other things that happen on
the physical plane? That it is not much more real than the physical
awareness in the wakeful state. What would we consider the
recollection of a past life? Is it a higher consciousness? Or is it
merely expanded awareness?

According to the perfect masters, all these experiences of bringing
into the awareness that which is not immediately available is only
expansion of consciousness or expansion of awareness and does not mean
any higher awareness or higher consciousness. People have experimented
with consciousness and tried to find out if they can find ways by
which they reach levels unknown to us in the normal physical wakeful
state. All of those experiments do not yield any higher level of
consciousness. Most of them merely yield information and experience of
other altered levels of consciousness --- such as wonderful dreams,
strange recollections, recollections of past lives, meeting people and
having strange feelings, emotional feelings arising out of the energy
centers in the body, doing yoga and kicking off new experiences which
one hasn't had earlier but are relatable to the other wakeful
experience. All these are expanded consciousness. These are examples
of expansion of awareness and not an example of higher
consciousness. [4:30] 

What then is meant by higher consciousness? Can we really pinpoint the
distinction between an expansion of awareness or expansion of
consciousness and the ascent of consciousness to a higher level? The
Perfect Living Masters, who are themselves experiencing higher levels
of consciousness, and can share it with us, they explain that a higher
level of consciousness is like a higher awakening. Like we have the
dream state when we go to sleep and in the morning we wake up it is a
totally different kind of experience. [5:15]

The dream suddenly becomes unreal. The whole of the dream world also
at the same time becomes unreal. The characters in the dream become
unreal. We do not say we have come from a certain place into another
place, we say a certain experience which was not real has ended. This
kind of transformation, this kind of change, is called stepping into a
higher consciousness. If the change is not so clear and so real we do
not describe it as higher consciousness. There are many yogis, eastern
mystics, eastern sadhus, who have performed many kinds of sadhana or
exercises in order to explore higher consciousness. When they try to
explore higher consciousness, they are fascinated by the fact that the
movement of human attention in the different parts of the human body
can kick off different experiences and sometimes the tendency has been
there to describe those experiences as higher consciousness. [6:21]

Patanjali, the great author of the treatise on Raja Yoga and on the
eightfold path of yoga, he describes how we can ascend from the bottom
of the torso through the 6 energy centers in the body and go right up
to the highest level behind the eyes and through the head into the
thousand petalled lotus. When he describes this ascent of
consciousness, he is really referring to the ascent of attention at
the existing physical level of consciousness through different energy
centers in the body. [7:00]

And although it looks like each energy center
gives a different experience as we go from the two lower chakras to
the third chakra to the fourth to the fifth to the sixth, although it
looks like the experiences are different, in fact we are merely having
different facets of experience of an emotional type, of the type of
expansion of energy, expansion of energy awareness but all in the
physical body in the physical level of consciousness and when we get
out of that kind of sadhana or transcendental state, or meditation or
yoga we come back to the physical state and we say "this is it. This
is the real state which we can explore through all these centers and
now we are back where we are and we can talk to other people in a real
way real terms of what we have experienced. Those experiences are
merely parts of our physical experience. Because even after all of
those experiences we still feel that the physical wakeful experience
is a real one where we can relate to those experiences. [8:08]

We can almost describe those experiences as side flights, side trips,
into different areas of energy and emotions which we normally do not
have unless we put our attention on those physical chakras in the
body. The perfect living masters do not regard any of those side trips
or flights into energy centers as attainment of any higher
consciousness. Because none of those experiences in any of the lower
chakras which people attain through the performance of this yoga leads
to awakening of the same nature as awakening from a dream in the
morning everyday. In fact, many of the experimenters have described
those states to be states of very great realistic dreams as if they
were very interesting dreams not very interesting
wakefulnesses. [9:06] 

After one comes out of that state of dream and comes into a wakeful
state from behind the eyes, and feels that the consciousness has now
come back from all those chakras all those centers back to the eye
center one feels one has really elevated oneself to the top. Many of
the yogis used to describe the two-petalled lotus, the eyes, as the
highest and they said we start from two-petalled lotus and we return
to the reality of the two-petalled lotus going in the middle to the
four-petalled lotus at the rectum advancing to six, eight, twelve,
16-petalled lotuses all along the way and returning back to the
two-petalled lotus where they started. [9:50]

And they said "what we have discovered by the entire circuit of this
yoga, of this experience in different centers of energy or centers of
emotions what we have discovered is that the truth lies within us and
although we start from here, we end up here and we are the reality
therefore the Self is the reality and by this circuit of experience we
have found our own Self. They've not found any new self, any new
higher consciousness of the self. What they have found is what they
regarded as ordinary physical life is not ordinary physical life -
that there are many other possibilities of experience and they had
those experiences and they've come back to the physical life which
indeed remains the top of those experiences and contains the methods
and techniques by which those experiences can be obtained. 

Therefore, although these are interesting, novel, new experiences,
they do not represent higher level of consciousness or a higher
consciousness. Therefore they represent an experience of our existing
consciousness in unknown areas of emotion and energy which we are not
normally tapping in. When we tap into them, then they look very
interesting and so we call them different experiences but not higher
experiences. [11:18]

You might have noticed that I am frequently referring to the
experiences of these chakras as energy and emotional experiences. Why
am I using the words? Because if you distinguish between the
adjectives we use for different experiences you will find that these
are the 2 adjectives that fit in with this experience - emotional and
energy experiences. People who have had experience of the yogic
practice of the 6 chakras, they have never had experience of things
like love, expanded thoughts, source of thoughts, universal mind,
universal consciousness, origin of akashic records, origin of the life
and birth cycles, they do not find any of these things here. All they
find is new levels of energy, unfoldment of energy, expansion of
energy, new emotions being raised, emotions coming up, solar plexus
rising up to one's emotional height. [12:20]

Therefore it is correctly described that these experiences in the 6
chakras below the eyes in the physical body are subordinate to the
level of wakefulness which we have right now. And although they are
new, they represent new energy, new emotions, they do not represent
new awareness or new consciousness or higher consciousness. 

So must then once again have a look at what would constitute truly
higher consciousness. The Perfect Living Masters they come and tell us
that real higher awareness starts from above the eyes. Now we are in a
physical wakeful condition and if we can have something that goes
above this then we can truly call it higher level of consciousness. It
should be a higher wakeful state not only a higher state of experience
but a higher wakeful state that we should feel more awake and this
world should look more dreamlike than it does now. [13:30]

Just like when we wake up from a sleep in the morning, the dream state
which occurred during sleep, looks unreal in relation to the wakeful
state in which we have come. Although while we are dreaming, the dream
state looks real. But when we wake up the dream state becomes
unreal. This kind of change in consciousness or change in awareness is
automatic. Nobody has to be told about it. Nobody does any research
into it. There is no study required. When we wake up in the morning do
we ever check are we awake or not? Do we pinch our bodies? Do we ask
questions of people we want to verify are we awake? No, we know we are
awake. How do we know we are awake? Because we recall. We remember
that we went to sleep in this very body. And what happened in between?
After we went to sleep, and after we got up, was unreal. That we just
made it up. And the dream looked so real. But it looked real because
we were unconscious of the state. So if we are unaware of or
unconscious of the physical state, the dream looks real. What would
happen if we were also conscious of the physical state? Suppose during
dream we remember that we are sleeping and there is out body
lying. The dream would look dreamlike. Would never look real. [14:50]

A certain amount of switch-off of consciousness, a switch-off of
awareness, is needed in order to make the lower level of consciousness
into a reality. Same thing is happening now in this physical state. In
our physical level of consciousness, right now we are experiencing
this reality around us because we have switched off the awareness of
any higher level of consciousness. We have a higher reality, a higher
consciousness, but we have cut it off. Therefore, this level looks
real. [15:25]

Why should that be? Why is it necessary for us to cut off something
that is higher? And stay in what is lower in order to enjoy it? Let's
put this question to ourselves in relation to the sleep and dream
state. Why is it necessary for us to go to sleep at night? Why should
we dream? What is the purpose of the dreams at night? Do they serve
any purpose at all? When we look at our own wakeful and dream state,
we come to know that the stress of the wakeful state itself compels us
to go into dream state to recover the balance of the wakeful
state. [16:03]

Have you noticed that? If you did not sleep for several days, the
wakeful state would be too burdened with stress. The stress of
wakefulness itself would force us to go to sleep and then come back
refreshed. Looks odd, but it is true. That we need a lower state of
consciousness where what we take as real can be shut off and something
else made to look real in order that where we are real becomes
refreshing and we can recoup our state of awareness. 

Therefore in order to fully understand the nature of sleep and
wakefulness, we have to understand the nature of the pressures of
wakefulness. When we are awake, we are under a certain pressure that
we are in a state of continuity of experience at a certain level. The
pressure built up in the continuity of experience at a certain level
has to be broken and a refreshing state of relaxation attained by
cutting that off and substituting it with something which is in a
lower level but gives a chance to the real pressure to be released and
we get some rest. [17:18]

So we go to sleep at night really to get rest. We go to sleep at night
to get refreshed. So that when we are awake in the morning in whatever
form we are, the physical body, the mind, the senses, all our systems
become refreshed. We have closed our consciousness at the wakeful
state in order to get a refreshing sleep and we wake up
refreshed. [17:45]

Then why should we have dreams? Why can't we just cut off
consciousness for awhile and get refreshed and wake up refreshed?
That's a very important question which only Perfect Living Masters who
studied the real nature of consciousness were able to answer. They
said, consciousness is a continuous reality. Consciousness cannot be
cut off. It is not possible for a person to be totally unconscious. It
is not possible for consciousness  to commit suicide. It is not
possible for consciousness  to die. Consciousness, or soul, or spirit,
is immortal. It is permanent. It cannot change. It does not follow any
laws of alteration. Therefore consciousness, or being aware of
something is continuous. Therefore we cannot have a state where we can
say consciousness is cut off. If it's cutoff it's finished. There's
nothing left. When consciousness has to be cut off it only means cut
off from an existing experience and tuned into something
else. Therefore, we must always be conscious of something or the
other ... to eternity. And this has been going on from an endless
beginning --- a beginningless beginning and goes on to an endless
end. And therefore this is an eternal continuity of consciousness and
therefore consciousness is the only reality. [19:18]

Because there is nothing else which has got this kind of infinite
life except consciousness. Therefore consciousness cannot really be
shut down. When we say we want to have rest, give rest to a certain
experience of consciousness, the way to do it is to cut that existing
level of pressure of consciousness that is more illusory, less real
than that and thereby give rest to consciousness at the more real
level. And its both relative. You can give rest to consciousness in a
dream state by going into a further dream and waking up in that
dream. Then you will have given rest to the consciousness in the dream
state by a further devolution into the illusion of another
dream. Therefore it is necessary always to have some experience of
consciousness at all times.  [20:10]

If dream is essential, does it mean when we go to sleep we are always
dreaming? The answer is yes! Even if we don't remember it. Even if we
feel we never dreamt we are still dreaming. People in the sleep
clinics now, they have been able to do a lot of experimentation with
the rapid eye movements and they have been able to find that we are
having a dream almost all the time during our sleep and we have
several series of dreams every night and we wake up in the morning
without remembering them. [20:47]
 
Why do we forget our dreams? Because forgetting our dreams is the only
way for to feel that we shut off consciousness. Forgetfulness is
another device to say we really have no consciousness. Although we are
conscious continuously, but by using this ploy of forgetfulness, we
are able to attain a state where we feel we had no
consciousness. Therefore we feel more refreshed. We had a deep sleep,
very refreshing sleep, because we had no dreams, actually that is not
a correct statement. The correct statement is we had deep sleep
because all the dreams we had we have forgotten when we wake
up. [21:30]

In order for this to work satisfactorily, the link between different
levels of consciousness has been so designed that when we move from
one consciousness to another, we get rid of our awareness of our
vehicle, our body of our form in that level of consciousness. And this
make it easy for us to forget the other level of consciousness when we
move from one to the other. For example, when we lie in bed at night
going to sleep, what happens when we go into a dream state? Even if we
induce a dream, or we get a natural dream, the first thing that
happens is forgetfulness of the fact we are lying in bed!
Forgetfulness of the fact there is a body lying in bed. That's the
very first thing. Nothing can happen. No other dream sequence takes
place. When that happens, the dream becomes real and we go to
sleep. 

The first thing is, to get rid of this feeling of identity with the
particular form. Similarly when we wake up, in the morning, the dream
fades away so quickly. Have you noticed how quickly the dream fades
away when you wake up? Just seconds before you wake up, you know you
are dreaming and then suddenly when you feel you are back in the body
in which you slept the dream is gone. You can't even remember
it. Every day it happens. So this fadeout process, taking place both
downwards and upwards, in levels of consciousness, is natural if we
have to have a refreshing sleep at a lower level of
consciousness. [23:05]

Mystics have been able to discover that by ascending in processes of
wakefulness, to higher and higher wakefulness, we can discover the
reality of this level of consciousness and the reality of other levels
of consciousness which are in fact states of wakefulness of greater
reality, greater wakefulness and therefore higher level of
consciousness than even the physical state of wakefulness. [23:30]

Does it not occur to us, that when we can wake up from a dream which
looks so real and make it look unreal, we could also wake up from the
present state of physical consciousness and find that was also a
dream? Is it not possible that we can keep on waking up like that
again and again and we do not know how far the limit is? We do not
know but if somebody who's awake and can nudge us in our sleep and
talk to us and wake us up at will: he can tell us. Look my friend, I
have come to wake you up because he's already awake. [24:07]

When we talk of Perfect Living Masters, we do not see their form
because we are sleeping and dreaming in the wakeful physical
state. They speak from higher consciousness. So when they speak to us,
we hear their voice either inside us or outside in a form which we
create temporarily. Therefore, when these higher level
consciousnesses, people from higher-level consciousness, these masters
of higher consciousness, when they come and wake us up, then we know that
this is a state of wakefulness which we think is awake but is actually
a dream-like state in relation to those higher levels of
consciousness. [24:44]

When these masters awake us to a higher level of consciousness, we
find it is not necessary for us always to stay in the same physical
level of consciousness, to explore other consciousnesses and come back
which is what the yogis found when they went into the lower
chakras. These Perfect Living Masters, they tell us that we can rise
to a higher level of consciousness without having to lose the higher
sense and come back into the physical level to explain or explore or
satisfy ourselves about those levels of consciousness. [25:22]

What are the levels of consciousness they describe? Briefly, they say
if you wake up you can find that you are in a state where you are
waking up like you wake up from a dream and you can see things, do
things differently that you did in a dream. The distinction is, in
certain principles of experience that we notice. For example, in this
physical level of consciousness, we find a certain consistency in
time, cause and effect of the different incidents that happen and they
said when you go into a higher level of consciousness, the consistency
becomes even greater. When you go into a lower level of consciousness,
consistency disappears. In the dream, different segments come, one
after the other and we don't know what the beginning, what is the
middle, what is the end. [26:20]

But in the wakeful state, above this state, we find even greater
consistency. We can recall events and how they are connected with each
other much more clearly than we can do even in the physical state. 

The
description they give of the higher consciousness is: where you can
sustain your experiences without recourse to the physical
systems. Where you can have a sensory experience, per se, without
having to depend on a physical body or a dream body like in the lower
states. That would be a higher state of consciousness. And you can
have an experience of past, present and future like you cannot have in
any other state. They say you can wake up again into a state of
consciousness that is purely mental. Where the senses don't play any
part. Concepts, the origin of concepts, the origin of shapes, forms,
colors can be traced back there. You can find the origin of
thoughts. You can find the source of thoughts. You can find the
packages of patterns of lives which we cannot find here. That is a
truly higher state of consciousness. And finally, these Perfect Living
Masters tell us that we can go to the highest levels of consciousness
where we discover that our real nature, our real self, never consisted
of any of the forms that we adopted. It was neither the mental form,
nor the thoughts, nor the other coverings of the senses, or the
covering of the physical body, nor the several forms that we create in
our dreams. That all these forms were only covers upon our true nature
of spirit or consciousness which can exist by itself. 

So, the highest level of wakefulness as described by these Perfect
Living Masters is pure consciousness where we do not have to wake up
any further and we can find that this is the starting point for all
other sleeps to refresh us back to our own eternal state of
consciousness. So that indeed is the highest level of consciousness.
